The Project Gutenberg EBook of Le Japon en 1866, by Charles de Montblanc

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Le Japon en 1866

Author: Charles de Montblanc

Release Date: May 7, 2008 [EBook #25364]

Language: French

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LE JAPON EN 1866 ***




Produced by Guillaume Doré and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by the
Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at
http://gallica.bnf.fr)










Le Japon en 1866

PAR

Le Comte Charles de MONTBLANC

(Article extrait de l'ANNUAIRE ENCYCLOPÉDIQUE publié par les Directeurs
de l'_Encyclopédie du XIXe Siècle_).

PARIS

1866


----


JAPON. -- Ce pays mérite une attention sérieuse. Les éléments de
puissance véritable qu'il renferme et les avantages qu'il offre à
l'Occident, au point de vue des relations commerciales, donnent à la
question japonaise un intérêt considérable. Par le spectacle que nous
présente cette contrée de l'extrême Orient, le caractère de ses
habitants, la direction particulière du courant qui maîtrise aujourd'hui
la majorité des esprits et la nature des obstacles qui sont opposés à ce
courant, nous pouvons juger la portée des événements qui se passent au
Japon; nous acquerrons alors cette conviction: c'est qu'il dépend de
l'Europe de grandir en de vastes proportions l'avantage réciproque de
ses relations japonaises.

Toutes les nations européennes ont au Japon un intérêt commun qui se
trouve d'accord avec l'intérêt japonais. La Russie seule, agissant en
cela comme une puissance asiatique, sépare son action et cherche à se
créer une mer intérieure à l'orient de son empire. De l'île Saghalien
elle marche sur Jesso pour épier de là toute fausse démarche de la part
de l'Europe vis-à-vis du Japon. Elle sait que seule elle pourrait
profiter de l'injustice; mais le résultat, quel qu'il soit, dépend
encore de l'Europe, et cette suprême influence résulte de ce seul fait:
c'est que le Japon est disposé à donner toutes satisfactions à l'Europe
dans la poursuite _légale_ de ses légitimes intérêts, qui sont aux mains
de la civilisation japonaise. La majorité des Japonais désirent, en
effet, posséder les conquêtes de notre civilisation. Le fait n'est pas
nouveau: en isolant les actes momentanés de fanatisme excités par des
hostilités intérieures ou provoqués par notre attitude blessante en bien
des circonstances, l'histoire du passé, d'accord avec l'observation
actuelle, nous montre les Japonais réellement intelligents et
bienveillants. Aujourd'hui, comme au XVIe siècle, leur intelligence
pénétrante les entraîne vers le mouvement civilisateur de l'Occident;
mais, aujourd'hui comme alors, ils ont l'intention bien arrêtée de se
défendre contre d'injustes prétentions. A la suite de la première
apparition des Portugais chez eux, en 1543, on les vit pris d'une
véritable fièvre de progrès. Les mémoires du temps parlent de la
bienveillance des différents _rois_ du pays qui recevaient les étrangers,
les interrogeaient et profitaient de toute idée tendant au développement
matériel ou moral. En peu de temps le christianisme fit des prosélytes
nombreux, au milieu d'un enthousiasme sincère et réfléchi, ce qui nulle
autre part, dans l'extrême Orient, ne s'est montré. Ces succès
très-légitimes inspirèrent aux Européens d'injustes prétentions: c'était
appeler la réaction et elle ne tarda pas à se manifester. Le Japon
rentra, en 1638, dans une politique d'isolement complet, après avoir
violemment arraché de son sein tout vestige étranger.

Dans cet épisode de l'histoire de nos relations avec l'empire japonais,
ce qu'il y avait d'utile et de légitime, de désirable pour les deux
peuples, se trouva momentanément condamné avec l'injustice de nos
procédés; mais avouons, enfin, que si nos pères ont eu à subir alors ce
déchaînement de toutes les violences, ils ne pouvaient s'en prendre qu'à
eux-mêmes et aux abus de toute espèce dont ils s'étaient rendus
coupables. Ce souvenir d'histoire ancienne n'est pas inutile, quoique
plusieurs termes soient changés dans le problème tel qu'il est
maintenant posé; il est bon que toute expérience puisse profiter. Notre
intérêt ne peut donc être satisfait entièrement que par la justice,
s'éclairant d'une connaissance exacte des désirs, des besoins et des
tendances du peuple japonais. Respecter ce qui est, en familiarisant nos
alliés aux principes de notre civilisation, est pour nous un moyen plus
sûr de faire tomber tout ce que condamne cette civilisation, que de
s'élever, armés de la force brutale, contre un ordre encore respecté. Le
système de violence aurait, de plus, l'inconvénient de créer, s'il
pouvait réussir, un édifice factice et sans avenir, tandis que nos
intérêts bien entendus exigent la marche d'un progrès normal, provoqué
par notre simple contact, mais réglé par l'autonomie japonaise dont
l'indépendance peut seule assurer le développement progressif.

Après ces considérations générales, dont on ne méconnaîtra pas
l'importance, nous avons à nous occuper des événements remarquables qui
se sont accomplis au Japon depuis la publication de notre dernier
volume. Le plus remarquable est, sans contredit, le succès (24 novembre
1865) de la démarche faite auprès du Mikado, pour obtenir son
consentement à l'ouverture d'Osacca, stipulée dans les traités conclus
par le Taïkoune. Ce fait est un triomphe pour la diplomatie européenne,
qui, par là, commence à sortir de la voie étroite et fausse où elle
s'était engagée pour entrer, à l'égard du Japon, dans la situation
vraie, dans l'ordre légal qu'elle avait trop longtemps ignoré ou
méconnu. Jusqu'alors, les gouvernements étrangers n'avaient voulu
reconnaître que la seule autorité du Taïkoune; ils étendaient même cette
autorité reconnue souveraine sur le Japon tout entier. Si cette
disposition avait pu faire disparaître ou soumettre le reste de la
nation, c'eût été peut-être simplifier la question; mais comme les
autres chefs s'obstinent à rester ce qu'ils sont, il faut bien en tenir
compte. Le Taïkoune est certainement un grand prince; mais nous placer
exclusivement vis-à-vis de lui, dans ses États, à l'exclusion des autres
États et des autres princes japonais, c'est former un parti dans ce
pays, c'est déconsidérer le prince qui accepte cet ordre de choses,
c'est créer, sans nécessité aucune, toutes les complications possibles
pour nous, pour le peuple auquel nous nous adressons, et pour notre
premier allié que nous voulons grandir.

Là se trouve la source de toutes les contrariétés que nous avons subies,
des crimes dont quelques étrangers ont été les victimes, de la froideur
des relations superficielles que nous rencontrons chez un peuple
naturellement doué d'une extrême politesse, et de plus entraîné,
aujourd'hui comme au XVIe siècle, par d'ardentes sympathies pour les
nations occidentales. Nous jetons sur le Taïkoune, vis-à-vis de ses
pairs, la couleur d'hostilité que nous donne notre position exclusive
dans le pays, et son pouvoir en a sérieusement souffert. Il est
chansonné, même dans ses États, dans les établissements publics, dans
les maisons de thé, où se rencontrent cependant des surveillants de
police. La dernière chanson en vogue est intitulée: _la Vieille
Chaussure_. Il y est dit que, lorsqu'une chaussure (les chaussures sont
au Japon d'une légèreté qui ne permet pas le raccommodage) est usée, si
on la raccommode dans son côté le plus mauvais, il faut successivement
réparer chaque endroit pour revenir aussitôt à la première réparation.
Le plus simple est alors d'en choisir une neuve. Cette chanson a pour
refrain une allusion à la famille taïkounale.

Ce symptôme est grave dans un pays où la police n'aurait jamais toléré
un semblable fait, si tout le monde n'était coupable de la même
disposition d'esprit. A Kioto, dernièrement, un assassinat se commet sur
un officier du Taïkoune; son cadavre est attaché à un poteau, sous une
inscription portant défense à tout sujet du Taïkoune de le détacher
avant dix jours. Pendant tout ce temps, le corps resta ainsi exposé,
dans une ville où la police est faite par l'administration taïkounale.
Ces excès sont blâmés par tous les pairs du Taïkoune, qui s'efforcent de
le soutenir dans sa position _légale_, tout en constatant entre eux la
fausseté des opinions que puisent les étrangers dans leurs rapports
exclusifs avec lui. C'est ainsi que, en assemblée solennelle à Kioto,
résidence du Mikado, cette ville fut déclarée capitale du Japon, en
contradiction avec l'opinion étrangère à l'égard de Yédo, qui n'est que
la capitale des États du Taïkoune. La position spéciale de ce prince,
comme mandataire du gouvernement central, lorsqu'il réunit, et seulement
alors, le double assentiment du Mikado et de la Chambre féodale, fut
aussi, dans ces derniers temps, l'objet d'une déclaration nécessitée par
l'action du Taïkoune, qui, vis-à-vis des étrangers, semble oublier qu'il
est mandataire et révocable.

Comme prince, le Taïkoune actuel est l'héritier d'une famille qui, vers
le commencement du XVIIe siècle, rangea sous son autorité directe les
territoires dont l'ensemble devait former l'apanage du gouvernement
central. Cette usurpation, sanctionnée par le temps, fait du Taïkoune,
comme prince, l'égal des grands Daïmios Kokshis; mais elle a laissé
subsister l'autorité du Mikado, comme chef de la Confédération
japonaise. Tous les princes suzerains ont intérêt à maintenir cette
autorité entre les mains du Mikado, qui, n'ayant de puissance que par
l'assentiment commun, est une barrière que ne peut franchir le Taïkoune,
mandataire du gouvernement central. Comme Taïkoune, il peut être
désavoué, tandis que les autres Daïmios suzerains, agissant
souverainement dans leur sphère particulière, dans leurs États, sans
prétention d'autorité sur les autres membres suzerains de la
Confédération, n'ont rien à craindre de semblable. Ces faits n'étant pas
encore de notoriété publique, il est bon de remarquer que l'_Annuaire
scientifique_ de 1866, qui mentionne avec bienveillance le discours sur
l'état actuel du Japon, prononcé, le 15 décembre dernier par l'auteur de
ces lignes, à la séance générale de la Société de Géographie, n'a pas
reproduit la pensée qui se dégageait des faits signalés par ce discours
pour réagir contre des opinions erronées. Nous répéterons donc ici que
le Japon est une Confédération d'États souverains et non un empire
homogène; le chef temporel aussi bien que spirituel de cette
Confédération est le Mikado, ou mieux, _Téneshi_ ou _Daïri_, qu'on
méconnaîtrait en l'appelant pontife et empereur spirituel; le Taïkoune,
seigneur sur son territoire et mandataire de quatrième rang dans
l'action générale, n'est pas un empereur temporel; les Daïmios Kokshis
et Toudamas sont des souverains chez eux, et non des feudataires placés
sous la suzeraineté du Taïkoune; enfin, les dispositions générales de la
nation japonaise sont favorables et non pas hostiles aux étrangers.

Cet état de choses une fois connu, la question se simplifie pour les
gouvernants européens, qui voient dès lors dans quel sens il faut agir
et quelle ligne de conduite il faut suivre. Nous sommes entrés dans
cette voie normale en sollicitant la ratification par le Mikado des
traités conclus avec le Taïkoune. A cette occasion, l'ordre légal fut
soutenu par les grands Daïmios suzerains, qui pressèrent le Mikado
d'accorder l'inscription de ces traités dans le livre des «Volontés
suprêmes.» Grâce à cette intervention, le Taïkoune, repoussé par un
refus du Mikado, et découragé au point de vouloir offrir une démission
qui l'eût ruiné, put voir s'aplanir autour de lui des difficultés si
périlleuses. L'Europe n'a qu'à poursuivre la logique de cette dernière
démarche pour obtenir au Japon tous les triomphes légitimes, pour sortir
d'une position fâcheuse et se répandre dans le Japon tout entier. Nous
avons à agir de manière à prouver aux Japonais que nous ne venons pas
chez eux dans un but de conquêtes ou d'immixtions injustes. Comme le
rôle que nous avons fait prendre au Taïkoune, dès le début de la
question, rendrait son intervention suspecte, nous ne pouvons utilement
recourir à lui comme intermédiaire. Par contre, il serait fort compliqué
d'aller faire des traités avec chacun des princes souverains de la
Confédération japonaise. Un détour étant cependant préférable à
l'absence de route, cette complication ne serait pas un motif
intelligent d'inaction; mais nous pouvons grandement simplifier la
question en commençant notre action directe avec assez de discernement
pour faire adopter ensuite à la Chambre féodale une décision en faveur
de la libre admission des étrangers à traiter, circuler, commercer et
travailler au Japon. Tous prenant part à cette décision, elle serait
souveraine vis-à-vis de tous. Ce résultat sera en proportion directe de
la vérité de notre première action. Il nous est impossible aujourd'hui
de rester dans la position que nous occupons au Japon. L'action est donc
nécessaire, et la responsabilité de ses conséquences pèsera sur
l'Europe, car l'Europe a le choix de l'action à produire. Dans ce choix
l'hésitation n'est pas possible: il faut nous prononcer pour la
légalité, ce qui est dans notre intérêt et dans l'intérêt du Japon, ou
pour l'injustice et la violence, en méconnaissant nos intérêts et ceux
du peuple japonais. La nécessité de cette décision ne résulte pas
seulement de l'ordre légal au Japon, mais encore de l'attitude des
partis.

Les Hollandais, parqués sur une presqu'île factice, avaient seuls
survécu à la catastrophe sanglante de 1638. Ce poste d'observation
faisait partie des domaines soumis à l'administration du Taïkoune. Les
Hollandais n'avaient donc de rapports qu'avec ce gouvernement, et
vis-à-vis d'eux toute autorité se résumait dans l'autorité taïkounale.
Dans ces circonstances, parurent, comme avant-garde des nations
étrangères dans leur mouvement à l'égard du Japon, les Américains, qui,
ne connaissant pas les conditions politiques du pays, cherchèrent les
règles de leur conduite dans les relations des Hollandais avec le
Taïkoune. Deux cents ans s'étaient passés dans un isolement presque
absolu; il ne restait des Européens que le souvenir des complications
apportées dans une époque lointaine de troubles intérieurs, par leur
présence, l'influence de leurs doctrines et leur ardeur à s'enrichir.
Les étrangers présentaient donc, pour les pouvoirs établis, un péril
commun en dehors de tout parti. Ils ne s'étaient ralliés à aucun et
s'étaient insurgés contre tous. Leur présence était en suspicion comme
dissolvant de l'autonomie nationale. Aussi, dès l'origine, lorsque la
question occidentale fut de nouveau posée au Japon, nous voyons les
hésitations d'un peuple qui, depuis 1638, se complaisait dans son
isolement. L'attention ne fut pas vainement provoquée. La prudence et la
curiosité plaidèrent en faveur de l'étranger.

Cependant, au début de la question, un parti s'éleva pour combattre
toute innovation et rappeler les Japonais au respect du passé. Ce parti
était peu nombreux, mais il avait à sa tête un membre puissant de la
famille taïkounale, le Gosanké Mito-dono, dont les violences ne purent
empêcher l'admission des étrangers, en 1854, sur le territoire du prince
auquel on s'était adressé. Auprès du Mikado et des Daïmios suzerains, le
Taïkoune se justifia en invoquant la pression des circonstances. C'était
lui qui était menacé par les étrangers; il les recevait, non par amour
ou par désir de servir leurs intérêts, mais par l'obligation de
reconnaître leur puissance et de tenir compte des canons qui garnissent
leurs vaisseaux. Cette admission éveilla des pensées tout à fait
nouvelles. Les Japonais furent frappés du progrès de l'Occident dans les
sciences, l'industrie, l'organisation militaire, la puissance de la
navigation à vapeur. En face de ce développement supérieur d'une
civilisation scientifique, industrielle et commerciale, ce peuple, trop
actif et trop intelligent pour se contenter d'une admiration platonique
voulut savoir les mêmes secrets, voulut posséder les mêmes forces, et,
sans tarder, se mit au travail. Alors se manifesta dans tout le pays un
mouvement inconnu. La curiosité scientifique, le travail industriel et
le génie militaire cherchèrent des guides nouveaux auprès de l'étranger.
La Hollande profita de ses anciennes relations pour se rapprocher
davantage. Un rapport intéressant du ministre des colonies des Pays-Bas,
en date du 12 février 1855, et inséré dans les _Annales du commerce
extérieur_, constate ce mouvement et le rôle qu'y prenait la Hollande.
Elle se fit institutrice des officiers, fonctionnaires, mécaniciens et
marins japonais dans l'étude de la construction navale, des arts
mécaniques, du maniement du fusil et du canon, du travail des forges et
des différents autres travaux. Elle établit pour le Japon des cours de
sciences. Dans toutes ces études, les Japonais se faisaient remarquer
par leur intelligence, leur facilité à comprendre et leur ardente
curiosité. Ce cordial rapprochement ne dura guère qu'un an. Il se calma
au milieu de nouvelles préoccupations et finit par se confondre dans des
rapports plus réservés avec les étrangers en général. Ce fut alors que
se manifesta une phase nouvelle dans laquelle s'affirmèrent des intérêts
opposés parmi les grands pouvoirs du Japon.

La cour de Yédo prévoyait le parti qu'elle pouvait tirer du nouvel
élément qui s'imposait à elle. S'en rendre maîtresse, en conservant aux
étrangers leur ignorance de l'état social du Japon, c'était posséder
peut-être une source de puissance pour elle et d'affaiblissement graduel
pour ses rivaux en féodalité. Traitée en souveraine par les étrangers,
elle en conservait le rôle à leurs yeux et tentait de le prendre
vis-à-vis des Japonais eux-mêmes, dans leurs rapports avec les hommes de
l'Occident. Les ports ouverts faisant partie du domaine gouverné par le
Taïkoune, semblaient poser la question étrangère comme un monopole
taïkounal. Les seigneurs suzerains comprirent les espérances de Yédo et
l'illégalité de la position que prenait le Taïkoune. Quelques-uns, déjà
prévenus contre les Européens, s'affirmèrent plus nettement dans une
politique de résistance contre le Taïkoune, aussi bien que contre les
étrangers. Le plus grand nombre et les plus puissants d'entre les autres
condamnèrent seulement l'action illégale du Taïkoune et reconnurent les
avantages de l'alliance étrangère. Ils affirmèrent l'utilité de cette
alliance pour le Japon, à la condition de ne pas se courber sous les
prétentions voilées d'un prince qu'ils savent devoir tomber sous sa
propre faiblesse le jour où ses prétentions devraient être dévoilées. Le
Japon fut ainsi divisé en trois camps: d'un côté la soumission aux
circonstances avec la conscience d'une faiblesse propre, et une vague
espérance des profits à retirer de l'étranger; c'est le parti de
Taïkoune. D'un autre côté, des sympathies franches pour la civilisation
occidentale, un sentiment de puissance et la volonté d'action légale
dans les améliorations à introduire; c'est le parti des grands Daïmios.
En troisième lieu, la vieille constitution et la routine en hostilité
avec tout esprit d'innovation; c'est le parti de la passion dans un camp
qui, sans force et sans avenir, tend à disparaître, et ne représente
qu'une nuance du parti taïkounal.

Jusqu'à présent, les grands Daïmios ne se sont pas séparés du Taïkoune,
qu'ils espèrent voir rentrer dans la voie légale, et le Mikado subit
leur pression commune. Le jour où les étrangers, par une politique
passionnée et décidément exclusive en faveur du Taïkoune, décideraient
cette séparation, le Mikado n'aurait qu'à se ranger du côté des grands
Daïmios. La nature de son pouvoir ne lui permet pas une autre décision.
Les événements, arrivés à ce point, contraindraient aussi le Taïkoune à
rentrer dans la légalité, et les étrangers, défenseurs quand même de ce
prince, se trouveraient alors ne plus rien défendre au Japon, si ce
n'est d'injustes prétentions personnelles en violation des droits les
plus sacrés d'une nation digne de vivre dans le concert harmonique d'une
civilisation basée sur le droit, l'intelligence et la liberté.

    Comte DE MONTBLANC.






End of Project Gutenberg's Le Japon en 1866, by Charles de Montblanc

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LE JAPON EN 1866 ***

***** This file should be named 25364-8.txt or 25364-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/3/6/25364/

Produced by Guillaume Doré and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by the
Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at
http://gallica.bnf.fr)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
